enhancements: creating private AWS clusters using PrivateLink (#1287)
openshift/hive: docs/enhancements/aws-private-link.md

# Private clusters on AWS using PrivateLink

## Summary

Hive creates a private AWS cluster using OpenShift Installer and then sets up
exclusive access to the private cluster using AWS PrivateLink. Hive creates an
Endpoint Service in customer's AWS account for the cluster's k8s API and an
Endpoint in Hub cluster to access the cluster's k8s API privately.

## Motivation

### Goals

- Support creating private cluster with no access from Internet using Hive.

### Non-Goals

-

## Proposal

Create a new controller that can identify a ClusterDeployment that requires
AWS PrivateLink access to the k8s API. This controller uses the ClusterMetadata
and credentials for the cluster to identify NLB for the cluster, setup an
Endpoint Service to expose the NLB to *specific* AWS role in Hub account, setup
and Endpoint to the customer's Service in Hub account and finally make the endpoint
DNS names available for use.

> Hive users the OpenShift Installer to *ONLY* create infrastructure resources and

Reviewer: Is the infra only deployment a new capability for the installer?

> then waits for the controller to report the private DNS names for the Endpoint

Reviewer: How does the controller know when this is ready?

the Endpoint service DNS names at installation.

### User Stories

#### Story 1

#### Story 2

## Design Details

### Private DNS names for endpoint services

doc: https://docs.aws.amazon.com/vpc/latest/userguide/verify-domains.html

When you create a VPC endpoint service, AWS generates endpoint-specific DNS
hostnames that you can use to communicate with the service. These names include
the VPC endpoint ID, the Availability Zone name and Region Name, for example, 
vpce-1234-abcdev-us-east-1.vpce-svc-123345.us-east-1.vpce.amazonaws.com.

For successful communication with API using **this** DNS name, the apiserver must
be configured to serve the appropriate ServerCertifcate and client-go clients
must be configured with the corresponding TrustCertificate in form of the kubeconfig.
This configuration must be modified day-1 (during installation) because we
need a valid working SNI configuration to exist before we can communicate with the
apiserver to update it.

So to solve the chicken-egg problem, we must use user-defined private DNS names
for Endpoint services that are easily computed before we begin the installation.

> This requires a **public** HostedZone to allow AWS to perform Domain ownership

Reviewer: Must assume anything public is not acceptable for the use cases on OSD.  What other options are there that do not require a public HostedZone?

TXT records are created in the HostedZone to verify the domain. When an endpoint
is created to the service in hub account, all subnets in the chosen VPC will be
able to resolve this DNS address to the endpoint service.

### Setup additional DNS name for apiserver at installation

To configure an additional DNS name for apiserver we require,
- the DNS name
- a trust authority
- a server certificate signed by that trust authority
- Secret object with server certificate and key
- APIServer object pointing to Secret

For simplicity's sake, let's assume that all apiservers will be configured
with the same ServerCertificate `*.<hosted zone domain>`.

We add the APIServer and Secret object with correct configuration during the
manifests stage of openshift-install and the cluster apiserver will setup the
listeners to respond correctly.

### Approving VPC Endpoints

Endpoints services can require that any endpoints created to the service be
automatically accepted or manually approved. Now since, these endpoint services
are only visible (or accessible) to users defined by the AllowedPrincipals list for
the service if only very specific user/role/account is allowed to create

> endpoints for these services, using automatic approval is a safe option.

Reviewer: Can automatic approval be turned off after the initial approval is complete?

```shell=bash
$ aws ec2 create-vpc-endpoint-service-configuration --no-acceptance-required
```
```shell=bash
$ aws ec2 modify-vpc-endpoint-service-permissions \
--add-allowed-principals '["arn:aws:iam::123456789012:root"]' 
```

Effectively only allow users in 123456789012 account to create endpoints to the service.
NOTE: This can be restricted to a specific user/role in the account too.

### Manual walk-through

Here is a manual walk through of all the steps that need to be taken today

> to setup the required environment.

Author: tested to bootstrap complete success..

So let's assume we have a public Route53 HostedZone `hub01.osdprivate.io`. And

> the computes DNS name for the endpoint service is `api.hash123.hub01osdprivate.io`.

Author: In the previous section i tried to explain the requirement for a public hosted zone to allow verification of the domain being chosen for the DNS name for the VPC Endpoint Service.

it doesn't matter if we have one hosted zone or hosted zone per cluster, as long as we can create a TXT record in the hosted zone for `{verification_token_name}.api.hash123.hub01osdprivate.io` = `{verification_token_value}` 

we need DNS name for each VPC Endpoint Service we create, and we need to create one VPC Endpoint Service per cluster, so yes there will be one chosen DNS name per cluster.

Create the manifests for install.
```shell=bash
$ openshift-install --dir install_dir01 create manifests
```

Add the APIServer and Secret object for setting up apiserver SNI.
```shell=bash
$ cat > install_dir01/manifests/apiserver.yaml << EOF
apiVersion: config.openshift.io/v1
kind: APIServer
metadata:
  name: cluster
spec:
  servingCerts:
    namedCertificates:
    - names:
      - api.hash123.hub01osdprivate.io
      servingCertificate:
       name: apiserver-private-link-ingress

> EOF

Author: Yes we will have to extent the install manager to add the serving certificates configuration for control plane at install time.

Rotating the serving certificates without overlap will definitely cause downtime as hive clients on day-2 will start trusting the new one while the cluster will be slowly rotating to new server certificates. Also rollout failures can cause hive to loose access to the cluster api unless it skip verification..

will add a section to risks to make sure we discuss the cases..

$ cat > install_dir01/manifests/secret-apiserver-private-link-ingress.yaml << EOF
apiVersion: v1
kind: Secret
metadata:
  namespace: openshift-config
  name: apiserver-private-link-ingress
tls.key: <the serving certificate key here>
tls.crt: <the serving certificate here>
EOF
```

Create infrastructure resources only.
```shell=bash

> $ openshift-install --dir install_dir01 create cluster --no-wait-only-infra

Author: updated to match the actual design for the time being.

```

At this stage the installer has created the NLB for the apiserver and the
installation is already in progress in the bootstrap ec2instance. We can use

> the installer tags to figure out the apiserver's internal NLB for the cluster.

Author: added the step of finding the NLB, we can't find nlb using tag but the name `{infra_id}-int`

> the installer tags to figure out the apiserver's internal NLB for the cluster.

Reviewer: Any scenarios in which the internal NLB might be deleted?  Attaching it to the endpoint service will block deletion, but if there are controllers expecting to manage this it would break them.

Create an Endpoint service in AWS account of the cluster.
```shell=bash
$ AWS_PROFILE=customer aws ec2 create-vpc-endpoint-service-configuration \
--no-acceptance-required \
--private-dns-name api.hash123.hub01osdprivate.io \
--network-load-balancer-arns <nlb arn here>
```
```shell=bash
$ aws ec2 modify-vpc-endpoint-service-permissions \

> --add-allowed-principals '["arn:aws:iam::123456789012:root"]' 

Author: https://docs.aws.amazon.com/AWSEC2/latest/APIReference/API_ModifyVpcEndpointServicePermissions.html

The VPC Endpoint Service needs to define which accounts/users/roles can create an VPC Endpoint to it..  and this makes sure the either
- entire Hub AWS Account can create the VPC Endpoint or
- the specific user whose credentials are being used to create VPC Endpoint be allowed to do so.
since for us we have this user information when we create the VPC Endpoint Service, it makes sense to only allow it that permission.

```

Extract the DNS verification information from the create.
```shell=bash
$ DOMAIN_VERIFICATION_NAME=$(jq '.ServiceConfigurations[0].PrivateDnsNameConfiguration.Name')
$ DOMAIN_VERIFICATION_VALUE=$(jq '.ServiceConfigurations[0].PrivateDnsNameConfiguration.Value')
```

Let's create the TXT records in HostedZone to complete the verification.
NOTE: This is happening in the hub AWS account.
```json
{
  "HostedZoneId": "$HOSTED_ZONE_ID",
  "ChangeBatch": {
    "Comment": "Add TXT record for domain verification",
    "Changes": [
      {
        "Action": "UPSERT",
        "ResourceRecordSet": {
          "Name": "$DOMAIN_VERIFICATION_NAME.api.hash123.hub01osdprivate.io",
          "Type": "TXT",
          "RecordSets": [{
            "Value": "$DOMAIN_VERIFICATION_NAME"
          }]
        }
      }
    ]
  }
}
```

Now trigger the verifiation of the domain name manually.
```shell=bash
$ AWS_PROFILE=customer aws ec2 start-vpc-endpoint-service-private-dns-verification
```

> At this point the Endpoint service is ready for use. Next create an Endpoint

Author: VPC Endpoint Service and VPC Endpoints can of Interface type or Gateway type. Since we are using private NLB as ingress, Interface type is being used.

Updated to be a little more consistent and clear.

--vpc-id <vpc-id> \
--vpc-endpoint-type Interface \
--service-name <service name> \
--subnet-ids $SUBNETS \
--security-group-ids <security group that allows ingress> \
--private-dns-enabled
```
NOTE: To use private DNS, you must set the following VPC attributes 
to true: enableDnsHostnames and enableDnsSupport.

Now the `api.hash123.hub01osdprivate.io:6443` from the hub01 VPC should use the
setup Endpoint Interface and Endpoint Service to reach the private API of customer's
cluster.

Update the kubeconfig used by the OpenShift installer to use new address.
```shell=bash
# modify the install_dir01/auth/kubeconfig
# replace api.clustername.basedomain:6443 => api.hash123.hub01osdprivate.io:6443
# replace the trust bundle to new trust
```

Now run the rest of the stages for the installer.
```shell=bash
$ openshift-install --dir install_dir01 wait-for bootstrap-complete
$ openshift-install --dir install_dir01 destroy bootstrap
$ openshift-install --dir install_dir01 wait-for install-complete
# install complete
```

Update the ClusterDeployment's kubeconfig used for remote calls to use the
new address and trust.

### AWS Private Link Controller

> The goal of the controller to ensure a PrivateLink is established to the cluster

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The goal of the controller to ensure a PrivateLink is managed for the cluster
```

managed = created and deleted

that is being created by a ClusterDeployment. The controller watches for
ClusterProvisioning and ClusterDeployments that require a PrivateLink and uses 

> the information in the aws platform to set it up.

Author: The controller doesn't need to interact with install pods for installation. The install pods will wait for API and will already be using the apiOverrideURL to contact the API and the controller can simultaneously make that URL reachable.

added alternative sections to this vs install pods creating infra only, waiting for setup and then continue to next stages. The only sequential flow, as the triage is still easy by using the conditions of the controller.

#### API change

The ClusterDeployment needs to include additional information for the controller
to create Privatelink. Some of the information that is required are,

> - infrastructure identifier for the cluster to discover the Network Load Balancer

Author: we already extract and populate the cluster metadata  on ClusterProvision before running the `create cluster` in installpods, and clusterdeployment moves those to itself as soon as it sees those.

> - private DNS name for the service

Author: service is the VPC Endpoint Service that was created in cluster's AWS Account to point to it's internal NLB for ks8 API.

> - User/Role in AWS account (hub account) where the endpoint is to be created

Author: depends on what you pass to the `privateLink.credentialsSecretRef`

- subnets in AWS account (hub account) where the endpoint is to be created
- credentials to the AWS account (hub account)

```yaml=
# clusterdeployment
spec:
  platform:
    aws:
      privatLink:
        # this is the public r53 zone in hub account where the TXT records will be 
        # added for domain verification of endpoint service
        hostedZone: (string)
        # this is list of subnets in hub account for the endpoint
        # the subnets used for the endpoint depends on AZs supported by the
        # service (which depends on the AZs supported by the NLB)
        subnets: (list(string))
        # this is reference to a secret that provide credentials to create
        # necessary resources in the hub account.
        # This role/user is only IAM entity that will be allowed to create endpoints
        # to the service created for the cluster.
        credentialsSecretRef:

>           name: (string)

Reviewer 2: It feels like this batch of info belongs global on the HiveConfig, the team which creates our ClusterDeployments is unlikely to know this info and not be happy about having to look it up, whereas the team which configures a Hive installation (SRE/AppSre) would be a much better fit. Could we model this as global information in HiveConfig?

Author: Added to the alternatives to make sure we discuss and report the decision based on current design.

here's why i think per clusterdeployment makes sense..

the list of subnets depends on the region that was chosen for the cluster
the hostedZone depends on the apiOverrideURL chosen for the cluster
And the hive components need network access to the PrivateLink setup using the VPC Endpoint.

These requirements need knowledge of the environment (where hive is) and the cluster that is being created. There is no good way to match the environment values to the cluster values requested by the user unless hive understands the contents of the install config as i see today. so the simplest would be let user gives us the write group of these values.

as we get smarter to figure these out (i think we can) we can make these fields optional.

-----

Hive controller has 
- a list of suported HostestZones (domain names)
- a list of subnets in each supported region
- credentials to make things happen

Given those values we can
- restrict that all apiOverrideURL be subdomains on the hosted zone
- only specific regions be supported

When the controller has to create VPC Endpoint it looks at the region of the cluster, and finds those subnets to use.

Reviewer 2: Did alternatives section not get pushed yet?

https://docs.aws.amazon.com/elasticloadbalancing/2012-06-01/APIReference/API_DescribeLoadBalancers.html
```
elbv2.DescribeLoadBalancers
  LoadBalancerNames:
  - "{infra_id}-int"
```

#### Creating Endpoint Service

Once we have the Arn for the NLB, we need

- private DNS name for the service,
The DNS name for the service will be the apiserver override URL specified in the
ClusterDeployment `.spec.controlPlaneConfig.apiURLOverride`

- allowed IAM principals for the service
The IAM pricipal that is allowed to access and create endpoints to the service
will the entity specified in the `privateLink.credentialsSecretRef`.

https://docs.aws.amazon.com/STS/latest/APIReference/API_GetCallerIdentity.html
The controller can use STS's GetCallerIdentity to figure out the Arn for
the AWS entity.

The controller continues to create the Endpoint service in cluster's account using

https://docs.aws.amazon.com/AWSEC2/latest/APIReference/API_CreateVpcEndpointServiceConfiguration.html
```
ec2.CreateVpcEndpointServiceConfiguration
  AcceptanceRequired: False
  NetworkLoadBalancerArn:
  - "{Arn for the cluster's loadbalancer}"
  PrivateDnsName: "{apiOverrideURL}"
```

> The controller stores the `serviceName` and `serviceID` to the ClusterDeployment.

Author: these are the fields in the response of CreateVpcEndpointServiceConfiguration

updated to include that.

different in different accounts.

The controller filters the list of subnets using the AZs. Using subnets in hub
account for all available AZs allows maximum availabity of connection.

The controller can then create VPC endpoint using
https://docs.aws.amazon.com/AWSEC2/latest/APIReference/API_CreateVpcEndpoint.html
```
ec2.CreateVpcEndpoint
  PrivateDnsEnabled: True
  ServiceName: "{serviceName}"
  SubnetId:
  - subnet-1
  - subnet-2 or more
  VpcId: "{computed VPC id from subnets}"
  VpcEndpointType: Interface
```

The controller stores the VPC endpoint Id to the ClusterDeployment.

#### Waiting for VPC Endpoint approval

The endpoint service is allowed to automatically approve any endpoint created by
the allowed IAM principals. So the controller doesn't need to take additional
steps but since approval can take some time, it needs to wait for approval.

The controller can wait for approval using
https://docs.aws.amazon.com/AWSEC2/latest/APIReference/API_DescribeVpcEndpoints.html
```
ec2.DescribeVpcEndpoints
  VpcEndpointId:
  - "{endpoint Id}"
```

The controller ensures that the state of the VPC endpoint is `Available`.

> #### Failed installations

Reviewer: Also worth fleshing out a deleting clusters section to understand what operations are performed outside of the installer and ensure all steps are understood.

Author: added `#### Deprovisioning PrivateLink` section for that.
